---
title: Install MariaDB on Raspbian
layout: post
---

MariaDB is a fork of MySQL following the purchase of Sun by Oracle. This is now
a mature project. I wanted to replace my MySQL installation with MariaDB which
is supposed to be fully compatible with MySQL.

# Pre-requisite

Due to the limited amount of resources available on the Raspberry PI, it is
mandatory to stop all your services before starting this installation. Firstly
remember to backup the content of you database:

	> mysqldump -u root -p --all-databases > backup-databases.sql

You can now safely delete MySQL:

	> service mysqld stop
	> cp /etc/mysql/my.cnf /tmp/
	> apt-get --purge remove mysql-client mysql-server mysql-common
	> apt-get autoremove
	> rm -rf /etc/mysql/

The second line backup the MySQL configuration file. It was useless in my case
but you may have done something smart in it.

A few packages required to compile MariaDB:

	> apt-get -y install cmake libncurses5-dev libssl-dev bison

	<!-- > apt-get build-dep mysql-server -->

# Install MariaDB

Your environment is now ready for the installation process of MariaDB. At the
time of writing, MariaDB was not available in the Raspbian repository and the
[MariaDB repository](https://downloads.mariadb.org/mariadb/repositories/#mirror=
nwps&distro=Debian&distro_release=wheezy&version=10.0) does not contain anything
for the ARM architecture (this is the one in your  Raspberry PI). Hence we need
to install MariaDB from the sources. Get the  [source
code](https://downloads.mariadb.org/) from the official website. Be careful
when you select the MariaDB version to chose one compatible with your previous
MySQL. You can download it using the `wget` command:

	wget "https://downloads.mariadb.org/interstitial/mariadb-10.0.16/source/mariadb-10.0.16.tar.gz/from/http%3A/nwps.ws/pub/mariadb?serve?&serve" --output-document=mariadb-server.tgz

You now have in your current directory a `mariadb-server.tgz` archive. Before
compiling the sources, my swap fil was to small (only 100MB) so I had to
increase it using the following commands:

	> vi /etc/dphys-swapfile
	> dphys-swapfile setup
	> dphys-swapfile swapon

Extract, configure and compile the sources. Note that these steps can take some
time (many hours):

	> tar -xvf mariadb-server.tgz
	> cd mariadb-10.0.16/BUILD
	> ./autorun.sh
	> cd .. 
	> ./configure

Since MariaDB 10.0.15, the Mroonga storage engine is compiled by default.
However it does not work on ARM architecture. Hence, it is mandatory to disable
it with:

	> cmake . -DWITHOUT_MROONGA=ON

And now the compilation will work:

	> make
	> make install

MariaDB is now installed in `/usr/local/mysql` (Yes it is `mysql`! Not a typo). We
can configure the database:

	> cd /usr/local/mysql
	> adduser --home /nonexistent --no-create-home --shell /bin/false --disabled-login --gecos "MySQL Server,,," mysql
	> chown -R mysql:mysql .
	> ./scripts/mysql_install_db --user=mysql
	> chown -R root .
	> chown -R mysql data

Get the `mysqld` init script and start the server:

	> cp ./support-files/mysql.server /etc/init.d/mysqld
	> service mysqld start

Once again you can note that the executable names are `mysql`. MariaDB use this
nomenclature to be fully compatible with MySQL. 

We now secure the server by setting a *root* password and deleting the `test`
database:

	> cd /usr/local/mysql/bin 
	> ./mysql -u root -p
	Maria DB> SET PASSWORD FOR 'root'@'localhost' = PASSWORD('newpwd');
	Maria DB> SET PASSWORD FOR 'root'@'127.0.0.1' = PASSWORD('newpwd');
	Maria DB> SET PASSWORD FOR 'root'@'::1' = PASSWORD('newpwd');
	Maria DB> SET PASSWORD FOR 'root'@'raspberrypi' = PASSWORD('newpwd');
	Maria DB> DROP DATABASE test;

Now delete all the anonymous accounts. You can get the useful lines with the
following request:

	Maria DB> SELECT User, Host, Password FROM mysql.user;
	Maria DB> DELETE FROM mysql.user WHERE User!="root" AND (Host="localhost" OR Host="raspberrypi-owncloud");

You should have the following content after deleting the useless users:

	+------+-------------+-------------------------------------------+
	| User | Host        | Password                                  |
	+------+-------------+-------------------------------------------+
	| root | localhost   | xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx |
	| root | raspberrypi | xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx |
	| root | 127.0.0.1   | xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx |
	+------+-------------+-------------------------------------------+
	3 rows in set (0.00 sec)

Now all the root users have a not empty password.

Or you can restore all your data:

	> cd
	> /usr/local/mysql/bin/mysql -u root -p < backup-databases.sql
	> cp /tmp/my.cnf /etc/mysql/my.cnf
	> sudo service mysqld restart

/!\ Careful! The third line is the source of potential [problems](#pb2)

You can now configure it to start at boot time:

	> update-rc.d mysqld defaults

Last, ensure that your PHP installation have the MySQL driver installed:

	> apt-get install php5-mysql

You now have a fully functional MariaDB installation. It seems to speed up my
Owncloud installation. My next step will be to replace Apache by Nginx!

# Problems encountered

## linux Plugin 'InnoDB' init function returned error.

When attempting to first start the MariaDB server, I get the following output:

	InnoDB: Error: log file ./ib_logfile0 is of different size 0 5242880 bytes
	InnoDB: than specified in the .cnf file 0 268435456 bytes!
	[ERROR] Plugin 'InnoDB' init function returned error.
	[ERROR] Plugin 'InnoDB' registration as a STORAGE ENGINE failed.
	[ERROR] Unknown/unsupported table type: InnoDB
	[ERROR] Aborting

Following the instruction on [serverfault.com](http://serverfault.com/questions/104014/innodb-error-log-file-ib-logfile0-is-of-different-size), 
I removed both `/var/lib/mysql/ib_logfile0` and `/var/lib/mysql/ib_logfile1`.

## <a name="pb2"/> After restoring the MySQL configuration file 

After restoring the configuration file I was not able to start the server any
more using the `service` command. Actually, this file redefine two variables:

	basedir   = /usr
	datadir   = /var/lib/mysql

These values where incorrect in my case. I removed this file that contains no
other useful information in my case.
